Nina
12/29/19   #161254  

Dear friends,
 About clinging to one’s personality. Acharn: Should we begin with the understanding that there is no self? There are only different dhammas, realities. When we hear anything about dhamma we understand: no self. We can have more confidence in what is said: no one, no self until it is direct understanding of what appears now. Then there is no doubt about the characteristic of nama which experience and of that which is experienced. 
Sundara: There was clinging for a long time.
Acharn: Forever, until pañña can eradicate it.
Sukin: We do not know when it will happen. It is no way near. 
Sundara: There need to be the continual understanding and application of understanding.
Acharn: by conditions. Otherwise it is the “I” who does. Actually there is no I, there is a dhamma, a reality. 
Sundara: the Dhamma is very subtle.
Acharn: And more and more subtle when there is more understanding. 
Sukin: More understanding means less the idea of self and less doubt. 
Acharn: understanding begins gradually.

She explained the term asayanusaya. Asaya are the accumulated kusala and akusala. Anusaya are the latent tendencies. 

Sukin: Before understanding that realities should be understood as dhamma. 

Acharn: There is just one reality arising and falling away. Without intellectual understanding there are no conditions for that moment to appear well, to pañña. If it does not appear well it is not known as it is. When it appears well, it is through pannña with satipatthana or sati-sampajañña only.

Betty read from Acharn’s Perfections about the perfection of wisdom:

The Commentary to the “Basket of Conduct” defines the perfection of wisdom as follows:

“Wisdom (paññå) has the characteristic of penetrating the real specific nature (of dhammas), or the characteristic of sure penetration, like the penetration of an arrow shot by a skilful archer; its function is to illuminate the objective field, like a lamp; its manifestation is non-confusion, like a guide in a forest; concentration or the four (noble) truths, is its proximate cause.” 

Acharn: there is the idea of self who is hearing or thinking. From the very beginning we should know: wisdom is what? Understanding.
